# Biohackathon Technical Report - Team 18

Angelman syndrome (AS) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by a severe developmental delay, intellectual disability, and a unique behavioral phenotype. Symptoms of AS generally become apparent when the child is 6-12 months of age, and severity and type of symptoms change with age. The current diagnostic criteria includes developmental delay, movement disorders including gait ataxia, unique behavior including happy demeanor, frequent smiling, hypermotoric behavior, and later seizure onset. The primary organ involved in the expression of Angelman syndrome is the brain. More specifically, studies have demonstrated abnormalities in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and the cerebellum. 

The primary gene involved in AS is UBE3A that encodes an E3 ubiquitin ligase, which plays a crucial role in protein degradation and synaptic function. UBE3A is first expressed in early embryonic development and continues into adulthood, but there is a shift from biallelic expression to maternal expression in the neurons. High expression of UBE3A is seen in the hippocampus, purkinje neurons, cerebral cortex, and hypothalamus. There are four different genotypes resulting in the expression of AS where the most common is deletion of the mother's copy of UBE3A. The less common genotypes include a mutation in the 15th chromosome inherited from the mother which prevents expression of UBE3A, imprinting defects on human chromosome 15, and the extremely rare case of Paternal Uniparental Disomy, where both copies of UBE3A are silenced. 

Current frontline treatments include managing symptoms by controlling seizures, addressing sleep disturbances, and behavioral interventions. There are many clinical trials currently ongoing, with significant studies including gene therapy aimed at either turning on the paternal chromosome’s gene or replacing the maternal gene, and utilizing antisense oligonucleotides to unsilence the paternal gene. 
 
## Prometheus Prompts
